VIBYRA RUST/TAURI ACCOUNT AUTHENTICATION PLAN
Reviewed: 18 August 2026

GOAL

After downloading Vibyra Desktop, a user must be able to create or access a
Vibyra account using Google, Apple, or email. A returning session must restore
securely, the authenticated user must be able to see and update their profile
in Settings, and they must be able to log out. All new surfaces must use a
clean, restrained Graphite and Cobalt desktop design.


CURRENT POSITION

1. The Rust/Tauri application currently starts the workspace without a Vibyra
   account gate.
2. Native state manages terminals, settings, AI-provider accounts, and local
   secrets, but it does not manage the user's Vibyra account session.
3. Settings currently contains General, Integrations, Custom agents, and
   Shortcuts. It does not contain a Profile section.
4. The title bar currently exposes a Settings button rather than a user avatar
   and account menu.
5. The Laravel backend already provides the required account contracts:
   - Email signup and login
   - Google and Apple desktop browser OAuth
   - Session verification, rotation, and logout
   - Password recovery and email verification
   - Profile updates
   - Signed-in device/session management
6. Settings > Integrations already connects Codex, Claude, and Gemini provider
   accounts. These AI billing/runtime accounts must remain separate from the
   user's Vibyra account identity.


RECOMMENDED ARCHITECTURE

React authentication and profile UI
        |
        | Safe Tauri IPC commands only
        v
Native Rust AccountSessionManager
        |-- Laravel Vibyra account API
        |-- Operating-system credential store
        `-- System browser for Google and Apple

The bearer token, provider authorization URL, OAuth flow ID, and credential
storage must remain native-side. React may receive only safe account details
and status such as name, email, provider, plan, verification state, loading
state, and errors suitable for display.


PHASE 1 - NATIVE ACCOUNT FOUNDATION

1. Add focused Rust modules for:
   - Account API requests
   - Account/session state
   - Google and Apple OAuth attempts
   - Renderer-safe account types
   - Tauri account commands
2. Add AccountSessionManager to native AppState.
3. Extend the existing SecretStore with a separate
   "vibyra-account-session" credential entry.
4. Store the bearer token only in Keychain, Windows Credential Manager, or
   Linux Secret Service. Never store it in Settings JSON, localStorage, logs,
   or renderer state.
5. Generate one stable native installation ID and a truthful device label for
   backend session/device records.
6. Add one native account API client using the existing reqwest dependency:
   - Production Vibyra API as the packaged default
   - Explicit loopback override for development
   - Enumerated endpoint paths rather than renderer-provided URLs
   - Bounded request timeout and one retry for backend cold starts
7. Expose narrow commands for:
   - Restoring and verifying a saved session
   - Email login
   - Email signup
   - Starting/cancelling Google or Apple authorization
   - Reading and refreshing the safe profile
   - Updating the profile
   - Password recovery and email-verification resend
   - Logging out
8. Keep every new first-party Rust and TypeScript source file within the
   repository's 200-line limit.

Checkpoint:
Native tests prove that credentials stay out of every renderer-facing payload,
invalid API paths cannot be requested, and credentials are written and removed
atomically.


PHASE 2 - AUTHENTICATION GATE AND WELCOME SCREEN

1. Add a focused account store with these explicit states:
   - Restoring
   - Signed out
   - Authorizing
   - Signed in
   - Retryable connection error
2. Make session restoration the first startup checkpoint. Projects, agents,
   models, shortcuts, and workspace state should initialize only after the
   account gate succeeds.
3. Create a full-window authentication surface using:
   - The existing front-auth-desktop-4k.webp artwork
   - The canonical cobalt Vibyra mark
   - Graphite foundations and restrained cobalt interaction colour
   - A minimal draggable title area and native window controls
4. Keep three clear primary choices:
   - Continue with Google
   - Continue with Apple
   - Continue with email
5. Use real Google and Apple SVG marks rather than placeholder letters.
6. Google and Apple use a unified Continue flow. The backend determines whether
   the verified provider identity signs into an existing account or creates a
   new Vibyra account. Do not add separate social signup and login pages.
7. Continue with email expands one compact form with a Log in/Create account
   switch:
   - Login: email and password
   - Signup: name, email, and password of at least eight characters
8. Keep provider progress and provider failures beside the provider buttons.
   Keep email validation and server errors inside the email form.
9. Include Forgot password, Privacy Policy, and Terms of Service links.
10. Do not add quizzes, onboarding routes, marketing dashboards, or extra
    account-choice pages. Successful authentication enters the existing native
    workspace directly.

Checkpoint:
Fresh-install email signup, email login, Google, and Apple all reach the same
authenticated account state without exposing a token to React.


PHASE 3 - GOOGLE AND APPLE DESKTOP OAUTH

1. Native Rust calls /api/auth/desktop/{provider}/start with the installation
   ID and device label.
2. Validate the returned HTTPS authorization URL and open it in the user's
   system browser.
3. Retain the OAuth URL and flow ID native-side.
4. Poll the one-time status endpoint until the attempt is pending, complete,
   failed, cancelled, or expired.
5. Show honest inline progress such as "Finish signing in with Google in your
   browser" together with Cancel.
6. On completion, consume the result once, verify the returned session through
   /api/session, then atomically persist it in the operating-system credential
   store.
7. Provide Try again after failure or expiry. Never fake success or silently
   replace social authentication with email login.

Checkpoint:
Cancellation, browser denial, timeout, expired flows, one-time result pickup,
new provider accounts, and existing provider accounts are covered by tests.


PHASE 4 - ACCOUNT MENU, PROFILE, AND LOGOUT

1. Replace the title-bar Settings gear with a quiet account avatar showing the
   user's first initial. Use an image only if the backend later provides a
   trusted profile-image URL.
2. Keep the account dropdown sparse:
   - Name and email
   - Settings
   - Log out
3. Add Profile as the first Settings section and visually separate it from the
   existing AI Integrations section.
4. Profile shows truthful backend data only:
   - Display name
   - Email address
   - Email verification state
   - Sign-in provider
   - Current plan
5. Allow display-name updates.
6. Allow email changes only for email accounts. Google and Apple email remains
   provider-managed, matching the backend contract.
7. Provide password recovery for email accounts and verification resend when
   the email is unverified.
8. Put Log out in both the account dropdown and Profile.
9. If terminals are running, show an inline confirmation explaining that
   logout will close them. Closing them prevents the next account from
   inheriting terminal output or active processes.
10. Logout should:
    - Revoke the backend session when reachable
    - Close account-bound running terminal sessions after confirmation
    - Clear the native credential entry
    - Clear account-scoped renderer state
    - Return immediately to the authentication screen

Checkpoint:
The profile refreshes from the backend, edits obey provider rules, and no
authenticated workspace remains visible after logout.


PHASE 5 - SESSION RESILIENCE AND SECURITY

1. Verify a restored credential before exposing the workspace.
2. Clear a saved session only after an authoritative HTTP 401 or 403.
3. On a network failure or backend 5xx response, preserve the credential and
   show a stable Retry state instead of falsely reporting that the user was
   logged out.
4. If the operating-system credential store is unavailable, permit a
   current-process session with a clear "sign in again next time" notice.
   Never fall back to plaintext credential storage.
5. Support controlled token rotation through
   /api/auth/session/rotate and replace the stored token atomically.
6. Redact passwords, tokens, OAuth URLs, flow IDs, and identity payloads from
   application logs and user-facing errors.
7. Do not accept arbitrary account API URLs or HTTP methods from the renderer.
8. Keep Vibyra account identity separate from AI account Integrations in code,
   state, copy, and Settings navigation.

Checkpoint:
Restart, expired session, revoked session, transient outage, unavailable
credential store, malformed backend response, and token rotation all fail
safely and predictably.


PHASE 6 - VISUAL AND ACCESSIBILITY PASS

1. Keep authentication always dark, cinematic, and restrained: one background,
   one logo, three provider actions, and one expandable email form.
2. Use the approved Graphite and Cobalt system. Reserve cobalt for primary
   actions, focus, provider progress, and meaningful state.
3. Avoid decorative glow, oversized cards, dashboard widgets, excessive pills,
   and repeated explanatory copy.
4. Keep authentication buttons and form controls aligned, comfortably spaced,
   and stable while loading.
5. Expand Settings to one stable desktop frame with a fixed navigation rail and
   one scrolling detail pane. Do not make short sections resize the modal.
6. Use a neutral selected navigation row and restrained cobalt focus styling.
7. Add complete modal behavior:
   - Move focus inside when opened
   - Trap focus
   - Make the background inert
   - Close on Escape
   - Restore focus to the opener
8. Support keyboard-only operation, screen-reader labels, reduced motion, and
   visible focus in every authentication and account action.
9. Review the live native application at:
   - 1440 x 900
   - 1180 x 780
   - The current 960 x 600 minimum window size
10. Review Profile and the account menu in dark and light themes. Authentication
    remains consistently dark.

Checkpoint:
No clipped provider label, wrapped primary action, inaccessible modal, jumping
Settings frame, or contrast failure is present at supported window sizes.


BACKEND AND RELEASE CONFIGURATION

1. Reuse the existing Laravel endpoints; no duplicate authentication API is
   required for the initial implementation.
2. Configure and verify the production provider credentials:
   - GOOGLE_DESKTOP_CLIENT_ID
   - GOOGLE_DESKTOP_CLIENT_SECRET
   - GOOGLE_DESKTOP_REDIRECT_URI
   - APPLE_DESKTOP_CLIENT_ID
   - APPLE_DESKTOP_CLIENT_SECRET, or Apple team/key/private-key fields
   - APPLE_DESKTOP_REDIRECT_URI
3. Register the exact HTTPS Google and Apple callback URLs with each provider.
4. Verify provider flows against the production backend from an installed
   application, not only from the development server.


TEST AND RELEASE GATES

1. Fresh-install email signup.
2. Returning email login.
3. New and existing Google accounts.
4. New and existing Apple accounts, including Apple's first-login name result.
5. OAuth cancellation, denial, expiry, retry, and one-time result consumption.
6. Restarted-app session restoration.
7. Authoritative session expiry and remote revocation.
8. Profile update and provider-managed email restrictions.
9. Email verification resend and password recovery.
10. Logout with zero, one, and multiple running terminals.
11. Tests proving credentials never reach renderer-facing types or Settings.
12. Existing backend authentication, provider, account, and session feature
    tests remain passing.
13. Run the complete native frontend/Rust checks:
    - npm --prefix desktop-tauri test
    - npm --prefix desktop-tauri run typecheck
    - npm --prefix desktop-tauri run build
    - npm --prefix desktop-tauri run rust:fmt
    - npm --prefix desktop-tauri run rust:clippy
    - npm --prefix desktop-tauri run rust:test
    - node scripts/check-desktop-lines.mjs
14. Build the packaged application and complete a live provider-login test on
    each supported operating system before release.


DEFINITION OF DONE

The work is complete only when a fresh installed copy of Vibyra Desktop can
create or access a real Vibyra account using email, Google, or Apple; securely
restore that account after restart; show accurate profile information in
Settings; update permitted profile fields; and log out without exposing the
previous account or terminal state. The complete experience must be verified
in the real Tauri window and packaged application, not only through unit tests
or browser mocks.
